# Sixth Pilot Meeting (25 June 2025)

## Agenda

* Overview â€“ Pilot status & progress (JRC) - 15 minutes
    * Ongoing activities.
    * Pilot Final Report (Final version).
    * 82nd INSPIRE MIG-T Meeting (27 June 2025).
* Pilot issues - 55 minutes
    *	Summary (JRC) - 5 minutes
    * Discussion (selected issues) (All) - 50 minutes
        * [SEMIC GeoDCAT-AP #68](https://github.com/SEMICeu/GeoDCAT-AP/issues/68). Example 35 Using Multiple dcat:bbox
        * [SEMIC XSLT #64](https://github.com/SEMICeu/iso-19139-to-dcat-ap/issues/64). Multiple geometry serialisations for dcat:bbox - NL / FI
        * [SEMIC XSLT #76](https://github.com/SEMICeu/iso-19139-to-dcat-ap/issues/76). Multiple instances of locn:geometry and dcat:bbox - IT
        * [SEMIC GeoDCAT-AP #175](https://github.com/SEMICeu/DCAT-AP/issues/175). SHACL: Constraints on locn:geometry, dcat:bbox, and dcat:centroid
        * [SEMIC GeoDCAT-AP #265](https://github.com/SEMICeu/DCAT-AP/issues/265). Usage of location properties dcat:bbox and dcat:centroid
*	Continuation of the support to geospatial HVD reporting (JRC/OP/SEMIC) - 15 minutes
* AoB (All) - 5 minutes

## Participants

* Member States: Czech Republic (CZ), Denmark (DK), Finland (FI), the Netherlands (NL), Spain (ES).
* European Commission: Publications Office of the European union (OP), Directorate-General for Digital Services SEMIC Group (DIGIT-SEMIC), Directorate-General Joint Research Centre (JRC).
* Contractors: con terra.

## Presentations and recording

Presentations can be downloaded [here](https://github.com/INSPIRE-MIF/GeoDCAT-AP-pilot/tree/main/meetings/2025-06-25/presentations).

Recording: Available on request. 

## Meeting summary

The objectives of the meeting were:
* Inform about the status of the ongoing pilot activities, including the Pilot Final report and the geospatial HVD tagging good practice candidate and its potential endorsement by the INSPIRE MIG-T.
* Provide a summary of the pilot issues, its status, and discussion on a selected set of issues (detailed in the agenda).
* Present the objectives for the activities to continue the support to geospatial High-Value Datasets reporting until February 2027. 

### Pilot status & progress	

The JRC provided a [short presentation](https://github.com/INSPIRE-MIF/GeoDCAT-AP-pilot/blob/main/meetings/2025-06-25/presentations/20250625_01_GeoDCAT-AP_Pilot-00_Overview-JRC_v2.pptx) reporting on the ongoing pilot activities.

* A third draft (almost final) of the Pilot Final report is available [here](https://github.com/INSPIRE-MIF/GeoDCAT-AP-pilot/blob/main/final-report/previous-versions/ISO%26GeoDCAT-AP_Pilot_report_v3.2-20250625.docx).
Final comments and contributions by participants are welcomed until the deadline traced in the actions.

* The [geospatial HVD tagging good practice candidate](https://github.com/INSPIRE-MIF/GeoDCAT-AP-pilot/tree/main/good-practices/hvd-tagging) is ready. It will be presented for endorsement at the [82 INSPIRE MIG-T Meeting](https://wikis.ec.europa.eu/spaces/InspireMIG/pages/177046460/82nd+MIG-T+meeting+2025-06-27).

### Pilot issues and relevant discussion	

* The JRC reported that the issues concerning the XSLT transformation of HVD properties according to the good practice for tagging of geospatial HVDs, are to be considered resolved and are now pending implementation. The more complex issues, for example those having to do with enhanced mapping of services etc., remain open and will be included in the follow-up of the pilot. A [summary of the issues and proposed action](https://github.com/INSPIRE-MIF/GeoDCAT-AP-pilot/blob/main/final-report/ISO-GeoDCAT-AP_Pilot_issues_v3_FinalReport.xlsx) is available in the Pilot repository and a preview of the document was shared.

* Additional room was given to the discussion of the misalignment of how coordinates of bounding boxes and centroids are expressed between GeoDCAT-AP, DCAT-AP and the current XSLT transformation.

* SEMIC (Bert Van Nuffelen) provided additional context and explained that the issue should be reviewed both from the perspective of the publisher of the original information and that of harvesting portals.
  
* The community was also invited to consider that any approach the geospatial community may endorse, will likely be followed by non-geospatial data publishers that are not necessarily well-equipped to handle multiple or various serialisations and geospatial standards. For this reason, being able to endorse a minimal common denominator by the geospatial community will be beneficial for a wider audience.


### Continuation of the support to geospatial HVD reporting	

* Based on outcomes ofthe pilot summarised in the Pilot Final report, a set of objectives for the continuation of the support to geospatial HVD reporting - including a second phase of the ISO & GeoDCAT-AP pilot and other potential activities - were presented to participants. They could be focused on four areas: (a) Efficient support to geospatial HVD harvesting and reporting; (b) Guidelines for HVD reporting for the geospatial community; (c) Alignment of INSPIRE to Open Data flows under the GreenData4All; and (d) Research on the potential use of AI-powered metadata tools.

* The outcomes of the pilot are still being consolidated until the beginnning of July 2025. 

* An update of the GeoDCAT-AP XSLT transformation will be possibly targeted by December 2025.

* Next steps on this regard are traced in the actions.

* An update of the GeoDCAT-AP XSLT transformation will be possibly targeted by December 2025 (TBC with the SEMIC group of DIGIT).

## Actions

The following agreements were reached between the pilot participants.
* Volunteers to revise the [third draft of the final report]([https://github.com/INSPIRE-MIF/GeoDCAT-AP-pilot/tree/main/final-report](https://github.com/INSPIRE-MIF/GeoDCAT-AP-pilot/blob/main/final-report/previous-versions/ISO%26GeoDCAT-AP_Pilot_report_v3.2-20250625.docx)) and provide contributions by 27 June 2025.
* Update the status of the issues discussed in this meeting.
* The JRC will consolidate the outcomes of the pilot until 04 Jul 2025. 
* The JRC will organise a meeting between the relevant EU-level services (mainly the SEMIC Group of DIGIT, the OP, and the JRC) in mid-July 2025 to agree on the activities to support geospatial HVD reporting until the next HVD reporting deadline, due in February 2027. It will be used to assign responsibilities and resources, and coordinate the activities of these services.
* The JRC will share with the MS news on the final plan of activities to support geospatial HVD reporting by September 2025. 
